This is Jocopot Gas No. 155 with me, Jocco-Willink.
On the island, the dead were piling up.
In the mission report, the head of the convoy wrote,
at 2 p.m. on May 20th, I went to the island of Nizino with Commander Tepskov.
There was a terrible scramble, people crowding and fighting around the bags of flower.
Dead bodies everywhere, a hundred or more, and lots of people crawling about and crying,
give us bread, boss, it's been two days since we've been given anything to eat.
They're trying to make us die of hunger and the cold.
They told us that people had begun eating the dead bodies,
that they were cooking human flesh.
The scene on the island was dreadful, appalling.
On May 21st alone, the three health officers counted 70 additional dead bodies.
In five cases, they emphasized the liver, the heart, the lungs,
and fleshy part of bodies had been cut off.
On one of the bodies, the head had been torn off along with the male genital organs and part of the skin.
These mutilations constitute strong evidence of cannibalistic acts.
In addition, they suggest the existence of serious psychopathologies.
On the same day, May 21st, the deportees themselves brought us three individuals who had been caught
with blood on their hands and holding human livers.
Our examination of these three individuals did not reveal any extreme amaciation.
And there's an elderly local peasant woman who reported the things we saw.
People were dying everywhere. They were killing each other.
There was a guard named Kostia Venikov, a young fellow.
He was courting a pretty girl who had been sent there. He protected her.
One day, he had to be away for a while.
And he told one of his comrades, take care of her.
But with all the people, the comrades couldn't do much.
People caught the girl, tied her to a tree, caught off her breasts, her muscles, everything they could eat.
They were hungry. They had to eat. When Kostia came back, she was still alive.
He tried to save her, but she had lost too much blood.
She died. That was the kind of thing that happened.
When you went along the island, you saw flesh wrapped in rags.
Human flesh that had been cut and hung in the trees.
And that right there is from a book called Cannibal Island by Nicholas W.
Who's written books about communism.
I think is most famous is the black book of communism.
Cannibal Island specifically breaks down one of the small individual nightmares of the Soviet Gulags.
But the nightmare was not small.
And it certainly was not specific. It was widespread and it was broad.
And it was almost incomprehensible.
And very little about it would be known or not for one man.
Alexander, Solchonetsen, who not only survived the Gulags,
but lived on to write incredibly detailed and very well-researched books about the Gulags.
Some of them were fictionalized like a day in the life of Ivan, Denisovic,
and for the good of the cause.
But most comprehensively in his three volume-tone, the Gulag, Arkepelegov.
And this series is a massive series.
And it's been cut down to an abridged version that was actually approved by the author himself.
And the abridged version has just been re-released in Europe,
where they forwarded by a man that I think repopularized that book.
A man that is here today to discuss that book and among other things.
I'm sure a man that I needed to give an introduction to the first time he was on this podcast.
But now who needs no introduction whatsoever.
A man by the name of Dr. Jordan B. Peterson.
Jordan, thank you for coming back on.
How is it rough beginning, Jockel?
Jesus.
Yeah.
I remember when I started listening to you would say something along the lines of that,
you know, we are quite capable of creating hell for ourselves as human beings.
And that clearly, that situation, I don't know.
I mean, that's hell.
Yeah.
And close enough.
And it's created by us, which I think is obviously horrific.
And the Gulag archipelago, you know, you talked about that book a lot.
And one of the things that, on that book, it's you hard, obviously.
For me, there's a book called About Face by Colonel David Hackworth.
I'm from a different world, I guess, that you in many ways.
The book that hit me hardest in my life was that book about face.
And it's, it's one of those things that when I read it, I started putting it together
It's like things started to fit.
And I remember that.
And I was wondering, I guess from my perspective, at what point did you read the Gulag archipelago?
And at what point did you start to say, okay, there's something really, really important here
for me to try and understand?
Well, I read it back in the 1980s, early.
I would say, I'd read some social nits and before that.
I read the day in the life of Ivan Nissovich when I was about 13 or 14.
And then I read the Gulag archipelago in my early 20s when I was reading a lot of psychological material too
when I started reading Yung and Freud and the Great clinicians.
And I was reading a fair bit about what had happened and Nazi Germany at the same time
and also Victor Frankl's man's search for meaning.
And the Solgenytsons book is, in some ways, like an elaborated extension of Frankl.
Frankl, of course, described what happened to him in the Nazi concentration camps.
And so relatively short book and it's a great book.
But the Solgenytsons book is, it's much broader and I would say, deeper.
And the thing that affected me most particularly was the psychological take on the totalitarian states.
You know, I had been studying political science up to that point.
And the political science, scientists and the economists, who I would say were under the sway of Marxist thinking,
although not nearly to the degree that they are now,
were convinced that the reason that people engaged in conflict was basically a consequence of argumentation over resources.
You know, it was basically an economic argument.
And I never bought that.
It never made sense to me.
Obviously there are circumstances where that's true, but it didn't seem to be fundamentally the case.
Like tribal warfare isn't precisely about resources.
It's maybe it's about territory or maybe it's about identity, but it never seemed to me to be simply about resources.
Partly because, well, a resource is something that people value,
but it isn't obvious why people value what they value.
And so it doesn't solve the fundamental problem.
Anyways, when I was reading Frankl and Solgenytsons,
I started to more deeply understand the relationship between the individual and the atrocity.
And that's what I found most interesting was that Frankl's claim and Solgenytsons claim as well,
that it was the moral corruption of the citizenry that allowed the totalitarian catastrophes to occur.
And that in some sense was the responsibility of every individual in the system who looked the other way or who participated actively.
I mean, even in the Gulag camps themselves, they were almost all run by the prisoners.
There wasn't enough administrative manpower to run the prison system without the cooperation.
So to speak of the prisoners.
So it is a surreal sort of hell where you imprison yourself and Solgenytsons fundamental claim.
And this was true for Frankl as well and also for Vaclav Havel,
who eventually became president of Czechoslovakia, or at least to the Czech Republic.
I don't remember which.
You know, they believed that it was the individual proclivity to accept lies that fostered the ability of Thai people.
The ability of tyrants to destroy the state.
And then, well, and that also led to complicitness with regards to all the absolute atrocities that we're occurring in both the Nazi state and the Soviet state.
And I think that's true.
When I read, like I read Solgenytsons books and a lot of the books I read about Nazi Germany too, not as a victim,
and not as a hero, but as a perpetrator.
And I know which I think it's really important. It's something that's really important to do when you read history.
Is that it's easy to cast yourself as a victim.
It's easy to cast yourself as the person who would have been heroic in the circumstance,
but it's also unbelievably useful to understand that there's a good chance had you been in those situations
that you wouldn't have been on the side of the good guys.
And that's a terrible, it's really a terrible realization,
it's necessary, realization.
Again, just going back to this idea of what you get out of reading,
because people ask me to ask me to, because I read books all the time on my podcast,
and what you just said, it struck me as something that's...
People have told me, I read that book before,
but I didn't really get out of it, what you got out of it,
and when I heard you read it, I was saying,
how did I... I need to go reread this book.
And I think one of the key things is you looked at these books as you were not the victim,
but the perpetrator, one thing that when I read books, I read a lot of books,
mostly about war.
For me, I always think about the people,
I don't always see myself as the person that goes in heroically,
storms the beaches and survives.
In a war book, there's these people that get mentioned for a half a paragraph for two sentences,
and sometimes they don't even have a name,
because you're the battalion commander storm in the beach of Normandy.
You're not going to name every single person,
but for some reason, and maybe it's just my experiences of being in combat,
when I read about that two sentences of that guy,
that gets shot, that gets killed, that gets blown up,
that's what I think.
I completely understand and relate to that person.
I don't just see it as me being the guy that is always winning,
and always doing okay, and always surviving.
I feel and relate to those guys that didn't,
and part of that is just because of my friends that I lost in combat.
Like those guys, they're people,
and I think that key thing of reading it and going,
man, every single person, like when you read about these,
you're talking about millions of people that were tortured, died, murdered,
every one of those people, key word as people,
every one of those people is a person,
and to your point, every single one of those executioners,
every single one of those murders, is also a person.
There's a great book called, ordinary man.
Oh yeah, we reviewed that on this podcast.
Right, and so it's one of the greatest books written about what happened
in the Second World War, I think, on the end of the atrocity end,
because the author does such a lovely job of,
well, it's a strange way of putting it in this context,
but it's about this police battalion that was moved into Poland
after the Germans went through and occupied the country,
to establish order like police do, but also to participate
in the mopping up, let's say, that was part and parcel of the war,
and these were ordinary policemen, middle class guys,
most of whom had been educated and socialized before the Nazi propaganda
machine really got rolling, so they weren't like Hitler, youth types.
They were ordinary men, and they were brought,
and they had a commander who had made an explicit case
that if they weren't able to tolerate the conditions in Poland
that they could go home, so there was no top down order that you had to do this
or else, and then they were, you know, first of all,
they started rounding up, well, mostly Jewish people men between 18 and 65,
and then, you know, they started to participate in the entire atrocious mess,
and they were, they ended up many of them taking naked pregnant women out
into fields and shooting them in the back of the head,
and what the author does is outline how that happens to you,
you know, one step at a time, and so it's a really horrifying book,
and it's a brilliant book, because there's no attempt to make
the perpetrators like some creatures that aren't human,
like just pure psychopaths, and of course, in a situation like Nazi Germany,
and in the horrors of the communist states,
there was no shortage of places for psychopaths to prevail,
but that's not really the issue. The issue is, well,
how does an ordinary person come to participate in a global horror,
let's say, and what does that mean about being an ordinary person?
And then the next question is, well, what does it mean about how you should
conduct your life, and one of the things that, I mean,
I think what happened to me when I read all this material in the 80s
was that I became convinced that there wasn't anything more important to do
in the aftermath of what had happened in the 20th century,
than to try to build people who were responsible enough
as truth-telling courageous, responsible citizens,
so that the probability would increase that if they were in a position
to make a terrible choice that they would make the right one,
and I would say this lecture tour that I'm doing, which is now extended over
more than 100 cities, is an extension of the same thing.
Well, I think it's the same thing that you're trying to do with your book.
We were just looking at your Mikey and the Dragon's book,
and you're trying to lay out a psychological pathway
that guides people towards responsibility and courage and truth,
and all of that, and that is the bulwark against tyranny,
actually at the individual level, and we kind of know that in the West.
I think that's part of the core ethos of certainly of the English common law
system, certainly of the American way of looking at the world,
is that each citizen is the bulwark against tyranny,
and that's actually true.
And that's a terrible thing to think through,
because it means that you are responsible for the integrity
or lack thereof of your state, and it's on you.
And there's something great about that, because it means that your existence
actually matters to you and to your family and to the broader community
in a really major way, in a way that's much more significant
than you might think, and that your proclivity
to abdicate your moral responsibility echoes way farther than you might consider,
especially under some circumstances.
You know, in Solge Nitz and one of the things that's so amazing about the Gulagar
Capalago is his story is not only of the absolute bloody catastrophe of the Soviet
state, and his incredibly astute documentation of the role that the utopian
political and philosophical assumptions of Marx's and played in creating the system,
right?
And then, in an aberration, it was a direct logical consequence of that
collectiveist viewpoint, and to document all that, but also to tell
English stories about people who were able at least to some degree
to not become corrupt and even under unbelievably horrific conditions.
And that's something you also get out of Victor Frankl's book,
Man Search for Meaning, you know, and so the Gulagar Capalago
is a story about horror in some sense, but it's more a story of the triumph
of the fundamental triumph of the human spirit, and perhaps no more
perhaps most evident in the case of Solge Nitz and himself,
because he memorized this book in some sense while he was in the camps,
and then wrote it under extreme duress afterwards, and it's an immense undertaking,
and it's unbelievably emotionally intense, the entire book.
It's like one, you know, 1,700 page scream of outrage.
You just can hardly believe that someone can write at that white-hot
intensity for such a long period of time, and, you know, his book had an unbelievable
global impact, I think it's sold 30 million copies, and it definitely,
for at least a reasonable period of time, made it completely untenable for
utopian, resentful utopian intellectuals to ethically justify their radical
leftist collectivism. It just blew the slats out from underneath any ethical
credibility that communism, that remained of the communist doctrine by the 1970s,
and that's a hell of a thing for someone to manage on their own.
It's a pretty big task.
So while you were going through that, I was thinking myself, so I was talking to
I still talk to military folks, and I was talking to some military leaders
young leaders, so like platoon level and company level leaders, so these are
guys that are in charge of, you know, 40 guys or maybe 150 guys.
And, you know, you can have some real ethical problems, and one of the things that I
said to this group was, I said, hey, in your, in your platoon, you've got a
murderer in your platoon. You've got someone in your platoon that is a
sadist. And they were kind of looking at me, um, suspect. You know, a
little bit like, come on now. Come on. What are you talking about?
How big is the platoon?
Well, platoon is 40 guys. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And so I was actually going to ask you how
accurate I was, and then I was going to actually say that no matter what you say
how accurate is, even if it was even if it was one out of every thousand, you
have to act as a leader as if in your platoon, you've got one of those
guys or two of those guys. That's the way you need to act. Well, you look and
there's another book called the rape of Nandkeng. We've covered that.
Yeah. Well, so one of the things that was really horrifying about that book
is so imagine that there's maybe let's say that there's one and a hundred just for
the sake of argument that's really got cruel and psychopathic traits.
What do you think professionally? What do you think that number is? Oh, I think
one percent isn't unreasonable. It could be higher than that. I mean,
there's gradations, right? You know, there's probably in a group of 40 people,
there's going to be one guy in there who's proclivity in that direction is
sufficiently strong so that you better keep an eye on him. That's for sure.
And this is a group of people that joined the millets. Right. So they're already,
you've already gotten, you've already got a group that's okay with, with
theoretically having to kill other people. Right. So this is probably,
you know, so if it's 100,000. Yeah. That's, that's likely an under estimate.
So I think your estimate is perfectly reasonable and it might be
conservative. What happened in Nandkeng was that the most
sadistic people became the targets of imitation and emulation.
And that's when things really get out of hand. Yeah. Right. So, and that's the same thing
for me, I'm a massacre. And that was, so when I was talking to this group,
and I'm getting, and I said to them, I said, you're looking at me like,
right now, like, I'm like, I don't know what I'm talking about. Like, I'm crazy.
Who knows about the me, I'm a masker? And, and you know, all of a sudden,
it got quiet because if you know anything about the me, I'm a masker.
It was a normal group of guys. It was a normal group of guys.
It was a normal company of American soldiers. And you know what they'd been through
some stress. They'd been through, you know, they'd had their friends killed and
it was in Vietnam. There was no one really to react against or to take your
aggression out on because the enemy, you can see them. They would hide and it
was. But then they turned and they snapped. And the same thing.
You had the leader, a guy named Lieutenant Callie, who is the
little tune leader, who, I love for you to do a psychological profile.
Maybe he's one of these guys. It was kind of like, it was totally
insecure about everything. And so he got those shoulder boards on, which is
the way the way a soldier needs to describe his experience as being a
tune leader. And what it did to him and he goes through that, this
book is fantastic to hear when he talks about what he did. He was looking
back saying, oh, I did this and I did this into this little rampage of
things that he, how he acted as a commander. I ate the food, the good
food right in front of my guys when they weren't good for, I was getting
the good food and he did a took advantage of all the little, all the
little comforts that you got being an officer.
Yeah, well, he was trying in the whole book, and especially in that
section, which I think is in volume two, which I think is the greatest
of the three volumes, especially the last half of it, which is just
absolutely, it's it's genius level writing, unbelievably
compelling and brilliant. And yeah, I mean, he, he said that when he
was in the camps that one of the things that he did, especially
once he started to identify people that he truly admired was to go over
his life with a fine tooth comb and try to, try to remember everything
that he did wrong by his own estimation and then try to set it right
in some manner. And so there was a, that's a repentance and then a
redemption, right? There's a real, there's a real fundamental, like a
medieval Christian undertone to all of that. But it, what, one of
the things that's quite interesting is that when you talk about
issues that are this serious, you're almost inevitably in a
situation where you're going to find yourself compelled to use
some kind of quasi-religious language because you end up discussing
good and evil and issues of redemption and issues of repentance and
issues of conscience and seeing and all of that. There isn't
language that's deep enough to get out, otherwise. And what
socializing it's indeed was scour his conscience and try to put
himself together, partly because he was shamed, he was a
shamed of himself in the face of these extraordinarily extraordinary
people who seem to be able to keep their moral compass under circumstances
where no one should ever assume that they would keep their moral
compass because certainly, like I said, when I was reading this
the Gulag and other books like that, I never assumed that if I was in
those situations that I would have been one of the people who kept their head
and were able to withstand the temptation to become a trustee for
example and to take things the easy way and to lured it over the other
prisoners and to adopt that position of authority. You know, it's like
it's like a head slave among slaves. But you know, you could say,
well, better to be the head slave than to be the bottom slave. And
well, that's true in some sense with regards to creature comfort,
but as socialists and point out points out, it might be a little bit
hard on your soul and that actually turns out to be something of
crucial, not only crucial importance psychologically, but crucial
importance sociologically and politically because if you
sacrifice that, then you warp the structure around you, which is exactly
what happened in the establishment of these camps. You know, and the
Soviet Union was just one big lie. What was their old joke?
They pretend to pay us and we pretend to work. It's like the
whole, the whole book and the whole Soviet Union, when you read
about it now, it seems like it seems like a bad joke. It seems like
a bad movie. You couldn't just the way the way that
Stalin would do something and the way that that order would come
out. It seems like one of those cheesy, you know, comedic movies
about these decisions that they're making. And it's surreal.
It's completely, it's completely insane. You know, at one point
he's talking about the, there was a new penalty for what they
called, clipping corn or, or, yeah, that basically a 12 year old kid
would be starving going to a field that we didn't. And
clip a cure a corn. And that happened in the Ukraine during the
decolocation, right? It was against the law to go out after the
fields were harvested. It was against the law to go out and
pick grain off the ground to feed your family. Right. And the prison
sentence was like a tenor, which is their little word for ten years.
So you're going to get, you steal a piece of corn or you pick up
corn off the ground and you're getting ten years.
Yeah. You can't comprehend that that is a very large
conversation that worked. Yeah. And they were, they, you know,
he did in the earlier parts of the book when he starts going through
the trials that they were doing on people. Yeah.
And it's completely crazy. Yeah.
Let's can't comprehend the cure.
Yeah. Well, that's why I hate to see the kangaroo court
submerging all over, all over the West, you know, and, and, and
with the university sort of at the forefront of that.
So we're building these alternative court systems constantly that
don't follow standard legal procedure. And it's really,
we're messing with things that that we shouldn't be
messing with. And yeah, the whole, I mean, there are, there
are accounts. I believe it's in the Gulag of, of, of a
pause after a stellen speech, right? Where people would
stand up and applaud and they, and they'd applaud until until
literally the old people were falling over because if you were the
first person to stop applauding, then you were, well, it was
off to the camps with you. No, he absolutely outlines it.
So that, that sounds so crazy to say. And he, he outlines a
specific thing that happened. It's that right there. These,
no one will stop applauding because they're afraid they're going
to get ratted out by their, by everyone else. Yeah. Well,
by the people who are in fact watching. And I mean, you know,
with by by the end by by the by the collapse of East
Germany, one third of the people were in for in
formers for the state. And so if you had a family of six
people, two of your family members were direct government
informers. You know, and it's, it's so, it's, it's creepy
in some sense. And it's a very weak word to use in this
situation. But when I was at New York University talking to
Jonathan Height about, I don't know, it was about a few
months ago. He just wrote that book called The
Carling of the American Mind, you know, and he took me into
one of the men's washrooms there. And there's a poster on
the wall asking students to turn each other in for
instances of bias or offensive speech. And they have a whole
bureaucracy that's designed to do nothing else. But
they're not just going to do that. But they're going to
educate these instances of biased speech. And these posters are
up on the walls as if this is something to be proud of.
You know, and the same thing is happening now in
Scotland with the Scottish police are doing exactly the same
thing. They're asking citizens to turn each other in for
hate crimes. You know, and the problem with that is the
fundamental problem with that. And the, the unsolvable
problem with that is that the people who are
going to be in the state are going to be in the state.
And where's the line drawn? It's like, well, anything that
upsets me that you say is hate. That, and then, and it's
worse than that. It's like, what happens is the people who
define hate end up being those who are looking to take
offense so that they can find someone they can define as a
victimizer so that they can persecute them morally and
justify that inner sadism. And those are the people who end up
in the state. Well, we're doing this to make our society a safe
place. It's absolutely, it's absolutely dreadful. And to see
that happening in the UK was just, it's just awful because I mean,
you know, the UK is a center, a center point of the idea of
free speech. I mean, a lot of American, obviously, a lot of
American ideals. America is a great center of free speech, but
I mean, it's a variation on the English system. So to see that
happening in the UK is just, it's awful. And to see the
politics doing this and being, you know, encouraged by the
politicians and, and to see this put forward as some sort of
moral action. It's just, well, it's, it's an echo of this
kind of catastrophe that we're discussing.
So I think about that sometimes. And I also have a
tendency to look at things and not not be too worried about
like, hey, come on. Yeah. What's really going to happen? Right? And
that's, yeah, that's actually part of my personality and
part of that comes from my old job where, hey, I can't
worry about these little things. So there's some little
problem going on over there. That's, that's not going to be,
that's not going to affect us. It's not going to, and you got to
pay attention a little bit, but make sure it doesn't get out of
hand. But that thing about speech and you just mentioned the
the cool lock. So that's a cool lock. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
They were the Ukrainian, they were the Ukrainian farmers who were
good at farming. When I read this part, it got me worried about
my own personal laxedasical attitude towards things that I
think, oh, that's not what we do. Let me read this little
section about the, about the escalation of the word
cool act. Yeah. And where it started and where it ended up.
Yeah. That's good. That's so, here we go. In Russian, a
cool act is amazingly dishonest, rural trader who grows rich
not by his own labor, but through someone else's. In every
locality, even before the revolution, such cool acts could
be numbered on one's fingers. And the revolution totally
destroyed their basis of activity. Subsequently after
1917, by a transfer of meaning, the name cool act began to
be applied to all those who in any way hired workers. Even if
it was only even if it was only when they were temporarily
short of working hands in their own families. But then
that doesn't stop there. The inflation of this scathingly
term of this scathing term, cool, cool act preceded
relentlessly. And by 1930, all strong peasants in general
were being so called, all peasants strong in management,
strong in work, or even strong merely in convictions. The
term cool act was used to smash the strength of the
peasantry. And I got to go a little bit further because
hell of a thing for the workers party to do. Yeah. They
went further though. Beyond this, in every village, there
were people who in one way or another had personally gotten
in the way of the local activists. This was the perfect
time to settle accounts with them of jealousy and the
insult. These are the people you were just talking about. A new
word was needed for these new victims as a class. And it
was born. By this time, it had no social or an economic
content whatsoever, but it had a marvelous sound.
Pond Kulakchnik. And that meant a person
who was the only victim to the
thing. And it was a different kind of thing.
And it was a person who was the leading
the co-lax, in other words, I consider you an
accomplice of the enemy. And that's all it tells. Yeah. Well,
one of the things I tried to outline in my foreword to the
bridge version was I was thinking about this idea of
the idea of the idea of the foundation that was
the foundation that was defined by our collective identity. And
that the proper narrative in relationship to our collective identity is
one of victim victimizer, which is a replay of the old Marxist
doctrine of bourgeoisie and proletariat. It's just in its new
guys. I mean, in that new guys developed at least in
part in response to the Gulagarch-Pellagal because the old
proletariat, bourgeoisie distinction became morally
unfair. And it's just a very serious point out that you're
status as a victimizer or a victim is actually the intersection of
your multiple identities. And so, and that's actually the
Achilles heel of the collectiveist notion. And we can get into
why that is. But there's a horror that goes along with that
that people that's not obvious that I think contributed to
exactly why the Russian Revolution went so horribly wrong.
And that is that so imagine that I could characterize you
in five or six different dimensions of group identity. It's pretty easy.
And while you're male, you're male of a certain age, you're male of
a certain age and economic class. You have a certain sexual
orientation, you have a certain ethnicity. You have a certain race.
That's six groups right there. And we could continue.
You know, your parents had a certain socioeconomic class and so
did your grandparents. And then your ethnic group had a
certain privilege or luck thereof. And you're a
tractive or you're not a tractive or you're intelligent or you're
not intelligent. There's temperamental variability. Like there's all sorts of ways of
characterizing you according to your group. Okay, now we might say that
if we were compassionate people that we would take one of those
group identities or more and look at where your
dispossessed and victimized. Okay, and we're going to find some
dimension along which your less privileged than some people.
Like maybe you come from a working class background, despite the fact that
you're like a straight male. And so you can be a victim on that dimension.
And so, and that's kind of, that's at least in part,
an element of intersectional theory, right? And that maybe
your, your, your oppression is the product of of your
multiple victim like identities. But that can easily be
reversed because it's absolutely the case that I can take any
person. And I can do a multi-dimensional analysis of their group
identities. And I can find at least one dimension along which they're the
perpetrator, not the victim. They're the victimizer, not the victim.
And as soon as I can identify a dimension along which they're a
victimizer, then that justifies their persecution. And so one of the things that you
saw happening in the Russian Revolution, and it's very much a
kind of what you just described was that the, the, the, the
borders of who, who was valiantly accused of being a
victimizer, essentially expanded to include everyone. And that's
actually right in, it's, in a perverse sense, it's right because
if you position yourself properly in, in the historical flow,
then you should see yourself as a perpetrator and a victim equally.
Well, it's not the right way to see yourself at all, but if you're going to
play that game, you're going to be on both sides of it. And then that
issue is, and this is related to your idea about, you know, in your
opinion, you've got one person who's sadistic. It's like, okay, well,
let's even assume that at the beginning of the Russian
Revolution that the vast majority of the people who were motivated by
communism were actually compassionate with regards to the
dispossessed peasantry. Now, I don't believe that, but we could say that
that was even a significant minority. Well, the question is, did you just say
on it? What was your, what was your hypothetical percentage? Well,
well, let's say, well, let's say it's 20% or let's even say it's 50% of
people who are genuinely motivated by compassion for the
dispossessed. But then there's another minority, maybe we could even
say it was only 10% to begin with, who weren't motivated by that at all.
They were motivated by the jealousy and the spite and the, and the, and the
resentment that socials and it's in describes. And they were the ones who
are after those to be persecuted. And the thing is, they got
up her hand really rapidly. And it might be because the carnivorous
types, the predatory types are much more dangerous and powerful than the
compassionate types. They'll take them out instantly. We're willing to
step up and smash someone. Yes. The people that are saying, oh, we just
want to help. Yes, exactly. Well, and there's someone I actually
cited a guy named, I think his name was Walter Latsus in the
forward, who wrote in a journal called Red Terror that if you were
interrogating an enemy of the state, you didn't bother with
niceties like their individual guilt. That was a bourgeoisie
conceit. And that's really important thing to keep in mind. What you
wanted to do is to do a class-based analysis and find out, well, are they
a member of, let's say, the coolac or the affiliates of the coolacs,
which is a lovely way of expanding your list of potential victims. And then
you execute accordingly. And that would mean, well, the person that you're
interrogating, right, or the class member that you're interrogating, and then
their children, and perhaps also their grandchildren. And Latsus
himself was eventually executed by the Stella and somebody wrote to me
after I wrote the forward and told me that that was his eventual
fate. And I thought, well, talk about standing on a chair and putting the
news around your own neck and kicking it out from underneath you.
It's like, you know, he basically he murdered himself,
fundamentally. And you know, you could say in some sense, that was the
story of the Soviet Union to a tremendous degree.
Yeah, there's one part going back to the ever expanding
people that need to be destroyed. There's a point in the book where he
starts, he's saying, hey, look, there's insects.
Stalin's just described, or maybe his lenin was describing these
certain people as insects that need to be destroyed. And then he just
that that just starts off with, hey, people that are
browsers, they're insects. And then it just expands and expands.
And then it's got priests. And then it's got engineers and
physicians and physicians. And everyone in records.
Yeah, records. That's the word that they use or that he uses in the book
for, uh, first basically saboteurs. Yeah. And that expands beyond
comprehension. Yeah, because at every single problem that there is
is the fault of some person out there that sabotages. And they
do this show trial. And he talks about it in the book for, I think
I think the phrase that he uses is or that they use at the
Russian that the Soviets used was organizers of the famine.
Meaning like, oh, yeah, you're starving. And these people over here,
they're the reason you're these people that organize the
famine. They're the records of production of food.
You bet. Well, it was either that, you know, you imagine that
you adopt a worldview and that worldview enables you to at least
in principle organize yourself with other people and to provide you with a certain amount of
psychological stability. And then things go dreadfully wrong. And then you have a choice
which is to re-evaluate your worldview, which is of course what
social medicine does in the Gulagar Capalago in a very deep ways.
Reorganizes entire worldview. Or you can look for reasons why you're right
and these things are happening. And socialists and talks a lot in the Gulagar
Capalago about, see, he had a moral condendrum when he was in prison and he
started his moral awakening, let's say. And he was trying to figure out how to
treat other people who are imprisoned. He had a real moral condendrum
when a committed communist was dragged into the Gulag system, which happened all the
time. He said those people were in particularly dire
rights because not only had they been subject to the entire tyrannical weight of the
deceitful state, but it was at the hands of their own comrades and friends.
And then the committed communist would enter the Gulag and they would still be
in their morally superior phase, right, that their incarceration was a
mistake and that things would be set right and that there was nothing wrong with the
system and they would attempt to justify it. And soleson it's and was never
sure how to react to these people ethically because on the one hand, well, they
were devastated because now they were political prisoners and maybe they got a
20-year sentence and they were in terrible stripped of their family and just
ruined. But on the other hand, they were still avid supporters of the very
fist that had crushed them. And so his eventual conclusion was that until they
broke and repented, they weren't to be allied with. They were still
essentially on the side of the while of the perpetrator and it seems to me that
that's right, that's that's unrepentant sin, let's say. And it isn't until you
what would you say? Until you take responsibility for your own complicitness in
your unfair interrogation that you get to join the ranks of of of
valuable and suffering humanity again. And so yeah, it's the extension of the
persecution is really something that's horrifying to see how who
constituted a victimizer, the ranks of who constituted a victimizer just grew and
grew and grew. One of the most shocking groups of people that ended up in
the Gulag's were the dam Soviet soldiers that had just got back to the
fight. Just not out of the same sort of thing you can't make up.
Yeah, you can't make that up. I'm getting the solution to who was like in
close combat with the enemy. And he wrote a letter to one of his buddies and
said, yeah, this doesn't seem like to be a great decision by Stalin.
Yeah. And next thing you know, he's in prison. Yeah, well, the
Stalin, Stalin decided that, yeah, this is something that you can't you can't
believe this. Well, it is, there is this like it's like, you know, if there's
something satanic at the bottom of this, you know, mythologically speaking,
there's also something that's like a cosmic, it's like cosmic black humor.
It's like the sign on Auschwitz that said, work will set you free. You know,
if that's a joke, right, it's a, it's a terrible, terrible, dark joke.
And so much of this has the element of exactly that kind of surreal,
I hate to say humor, but it's, it's right. I mean, Stalin decided that the,
okay, so the Soviet prisoners of war were not covered by the Geneva
Convention for the treatment of prisoners of war, because Stalin refused
to sign that agreement. So like if you were an allied prisoner of the
Germans, it wasn't like you were having a great time of it. Like food was
in short supply and you were treated pretty brutally, but the Soviets were kept
separately and they were doing so badly that the Allies used to throw
food packets over the fence when that was an option. So the Soviet prisoners
of war were treated absolutely dreadfully and, and, and Stalin didn't
care about that. And then when they were released and went back to the
Soviet Union, his dictum was that because they had been exposed to the
capitalist West or even the Nazi West for that matter that they had now
been intolerably corrupted on ideological grounds and had to be put in the
prison camps. So that was the, that was your destiny as, you know, I mean,
first of all, you were a frontline Russian soldier, which was just
brutal beyond belief. Their army was completely unprepared for Hitler's
invasion because Stalin trusted Hitler in his strange way. And so they
were completely unprepared. And of course, then fighting in the Soviet Union
with its winters, I mean, you just, you just can't imagine what that
must have been like. And then to be thrown in a prisoner of war camp
at the bottom of the wrong and then to be brought back to your country.
And then to be imprisoned as a traitor because as a class you'd be
exposed to the wrong ideology. It's like you just, it's, it's, it's
unimaginably vile and surreal at the same time. And it, it, it,
it, it, it shake your head. It, for me, well, it's such a shock to read the
Gulagkar Capelago. It, it, it, it, it just can't, it's, it's, it's like
it's like it, it isn't like Dante's in front of. It's like a trip into
hell. Yeah, yeah, and I guess you're, that's what I was trying to say
with when we started this conversation, I was trying to say that
it's like you're watching this, like like you said, it's like a
bad comedy movie. And you'd think, well, that's that'd be really
that. You'd think, you know, when you, when you take a comedy, one of
the things, one of the ways you can make people laugh is to take something
ordinary and maybe make it much more extreme in the more extreme.
You make it the more funny it becomes. That's what, like, happened here.
You're looking at this thing going, hey, oh, yeah, they, they seem to be trying to
make this funny because who, in, could ever conceive that you could
take your front line soldiers who are captured and in, in misery.
And when they return home, instead of treating them like heroes,
instead, you put them back into a prison. We're swan, even. You can't even,
you can't even, that's just, that's, no, you can't make this stuff.
You can't make it up. No, did you see, I believe that movie was the
death of Stalin? I did not see it. That's worth seeing because it's,
it's very interesting because one of the things about that movie is that
it captures that surreal element because it's a black comedy, you know,
and, and there are comical things happening in the movie in that
terrible dark way, constantly, at the same time that in the background
genuinely terrible things are happening. So it's that horrible,
it's, it's got that horrible, satirical flavor that runs through books
like the Gulagar Capelago, where you think, well, there's just no,
this is so absurd that there's no possible way it could have occurred.
And yet, that's not only did it happen, there was like a contest
to top the absurdity, you know, to, to, to consider the engineers, for example,
records is, well, these people were building the, so the,
it's system to the degree that it was built, and then to turn around and
accuse exactly those people of being the ones who destroy and
undermine it. It's, it's, it's part of, I really think that
what's, what underlies this, whatever this is. And I think this is
what manifests itself in the worst of the leftist collectivism is a real
hatred for anything that smacks of competence at all. Like, I, I tried to
imagine those Russian villages, because I come from a small town, a
small northern town too. So I kind of, I tried to imagine, so imagine
that you're in an isolated village, and it's a peasant village,
and the peasants weren't freed that long ago, right? They were
basically surfs until, until about the middle of the second half of the
19th century. And so they had been emancipated, and then some of
those people who were emancipated, got a little bit of land, and
started to have a life, you know, it started to be successful pezons.
And they were also the people that grew the bulk of the crops, because
what you see happening in any productive domain is that a small
percentage of people do almost all the productive work. So there's
a small percentage of productive farmers who grew all the crops,
right? And then there's all sorts of farmers who were only
farmers by name, and they weren't successful at all. So you have,
and then there was a certain relationship between being
productive as a farmer, and developing some wealth, maybe had a house
and maybe you could hire a person or two, you know, and which you
think would actually be a good thing, especially if you're also
growing food. Okay, so imagine you get a village, and now there's
a bit of a socioeconomic pyramid, and there's some people that
are doing well, and they're really, and there are, and it isn't
the crooked people that are really annoying, though people who, like
the genuine cool acts, let's say that that small percentage of
psychopathic types who were basically profiting criminally off the
efforts of others. Those aren't so annoying those people because
they're rich, but they don't deserve it. And so they don't
stand towards you as a moral ideal that shames you. But the
really annoying people are the ones who are doing well and
deserve it, especially if you're someone who's doing nothing and
is better. Okay, so now, so there's the village, and you've
got your people who are doing all right, and then you've got a huge
strad of people who aren't upset about the people who are doing
well, they might even admire them and be happy that they're
around because they're making the community thrive and growing
some food. Then you have this little strad at the bottom of
people who are near-do wells and on the more psychopathic end of
things, and they're bitter and resentful and waiting for their
bloody opportunity. And then the communist intellectuals
come into town and say, you know those people that are doing
well, they actually, everything they've got is ill-
gotten and they stole it and they stole it from you from you.
And look at how badly you're doing and the reason you're doing
badly is because these people who are lording it over you and
who have all this creature comfort, they took that from you.
It's yours by right. And so then all that resentment and
jealousy and hatred and rage alcohol fueled as you might well
imagine has this moral reason to go with pitchforks and
any in a mob and surround those houses and to strip them of everything
they have and to rape the women and to kill the occupants or to
ship them off to the middle of Siberia when they were they
froze to death because there were no or died of dysentery or
or whatever other plague managed to, you know, we've
its way through these camps. And so you have the intellectuals
providing the moral rationale for the worst ethical actors in
these small villages doing the worst possible things under the
guys of compassion. Right. And that's part of that victim
victimizer narrative. It's just. And you know, like you can
imagine that, you can imagine a dark night, you can imagine
the winter, you can imagine the alcohol, you can imagine the
rage that fuels these people who are drinking too much in the
pubs that have been sitting there for the last 20 years like
what would you say eating up their own souls with resentment and
bitterness and then someone comes in and says you're the true
victim here and here's the people that you can go after. And
then like if you play that on your imagination, you get some real
sense of exactly what sort of horror that would produce. You
know, you think about the rape, for example, or just the
theft or but it's the rape that you can really think about
as as absolute revenge for all that bitter resentment all
fueled by the fact that, you know, you'd sat there for the
last 20 years being completely goddamn useless and bitter
hatred and angry and and and and fantasizing about the day
that would come where you'd have your opportunity. God and then
the whole country and that was the whole country.
Just unbelievable. Yeah, I think he spells that out very
clearly and he says it's you know what he's saying. You know,
I'm saying that you got a psychopath in your plateau. He
saying that psychopath all that psychopath needs to flip is is the
is someone to tell him that's the right thing to do. And that's
exactly what happened when you said that's it. That's it.
Guys that were slightly psychopathic. Yeah. And then it
becomes okay. I'm the I'm the head psychopath and you're in my
village. And you're let's say you're one of those people
that are in the middle. Well, who's side are you going to be on?
I'm a psychopath if you if you're not on my side, I'm going to
kill you next. Yeah. So you go, well, no, I'm on your side too.
And that's what it was. Well, and it doesn't take luck. It's not like
it takes much pressure on people to have them fold. I mean, one of
the things you see you see happening right now in our
cultures. That's happening to people all the time with these
Twitter wars. You know, someone will say something. They'll
express an opinion and then they'll get mobbed by and but
only abstractly, right? It's not like there's pitch for
wielding mobs at their house. And I'm not making light of it.
It's no, it's no pleasant thing to be mobbed on Twitter. But
that's an abstraction compared to these people showing up at
your house. And what will happen is that people will go
through an object apology. You know, and they'll say, well, I
really didn't mean it. And now I understand what my privileges and
I see how what I said could have been very hurtful to people. And
you know, they they wander through that entire apology and fold
almost instantly. And that's under almost almost no pressure.
Compared to what real pressure is. And real pressure is when the
wolves are actually at your door rather than just barking
off in the distance. But people will fold just when they're
barking in the distance. So there's one lawyer that he talks
about in here is the same thing as the story that you described.
And I forget the guy's name. But this guy was like the premier
prosecuting lawyer for the Soviet government. And he just
rips people apart over and over again. And as you read about
what happens in sure enough, he's one of the guys that didn't
up on the offensive and yeah. Being executed. Yeah. Like
they still see people. They built a place of butchery and
then through themselves into it. You know, that's an
and you see. So it's in documents this very carefully. I mean
Stalin killed all the people who were foremost actors in
the Russian Revolution. Right. So I mean everyone was fed
into the great grinding machine. So and and Stalin
himself. I mean it looked to me like see he got
himself into something approximating a positive feedback loop
which is very dangerous thing to have happened. And I think
socializing doesn't a lovely job of detailing this as well.
So it's like imagine that I have a fair amount of content
for people to begin with. And then I find that people are
not trusting person and I find that I'm very paranoid about
the fact that people are lying to me. And then I develop a
certain amount of power and a reputation. Well then people
really do start lying to me all the time in every gesture.
You know, because every time they come near me they're
absolutely terrified and they're going to tell me anything
that I want to hear. And of course then all that does
is validate my view of how pathetic and contemptible
everyone is. And so in the more that view gets validated
the more I think that it's okay to destroy people because
look at how pathetic and contemptible they are, how they always
lie. And all that means is that they lie even more. And so this
whole thing just spirals out of control. And you know,
Stalin basically started out as as the brutal
enforcement henchmen for henchmen for Lenin, right?
The killer for hire. And not like Lenin was above
that sort of thing himself. But he trained Stalin. And
then Stalin's proclivity to be murderous just kept
expanding without limit. Right? First of all, it was
individuals and then it was groups and then it was
nations and then well by the end of his life. Well what
was it the plot to destroy the entire world?
To initiate the third world war to wipe out Europe to
maybe destroy everything. And like there's no limit.
There was no limit to that. You know, and there's some
evidence that that's perhaps why he was killed. You know,
because Stalin himself even went too far for the horrible
horrible, what semi. The corrupted
compatriots that he had arranged around himself. He went too far
even for them. And thank God for that, you know, but
yeah, it's absolute. I mean, the thing that the
Gulagkar, Gulagkar, Gulagkar, Gulagkar, Gulagkar
did for me. And this was also in keeping as a
consequence, also of reading Yung at the same time, but
it was certainly the Gulagkar in large part that it
did it. I would say that in some sense it's scared me
straight. I thought I see the consequences of unethical
behavior deceit the willingness to turn a blind eye.
So even sins of a mission rather than sins of commission,
just to turn a blind eye. The consequences of that are
so absolutely dreadful that it's not acceptable. And I
think that's the right lesson from the 20th century. It's that
you, you, you, you have a much more important moral
role to play in keeping things straight than you want to
believe. You know, people think, well, my life is
basically meaningless. It's like, well, that's quite
terrifying. It's like, yeah, it's kind of terrifying, but
it means you don't have any responsibility. So there's a
big advantage to thinking that. You know, if nothing you do
matters, then nothing you do matters. And so you can do
whatever you want. And that's horrifying in a nihilistic
sort of way, but there's another kind of horror that's more
associated, I think, with the horror of Hellfire that was
characteristic of the medieval Christian view is which is
something like, and if you strip it of its metaphysics,
it's something like, no, you don't get it. The things you do
actually do, the things you do or don't do, they actually
don't matter. And they tilt the world towards, you know, something
approximating good, let's say, or towards something that very
closely approximates Hell, and that's actually on you.
It's literally your fault. It's literally your responsibility.
It's like, man, that's a terrifying idea, but I can't see
how you can read this literature without coming to that
conclusion. Like, it wasn't one that I wanted to leap to, you know,
because it's sort of the ultimate in horrifying conclusions that
that everybody who participated in this system was that fault for
all of it. And on Dusty F ski made the same sorts of claims in
the last part of the 19th century. I mean, he was a very weird,
mystical sort of person, you know, and he made claims or some of
his characters to it, but on his behalf that, you know, not only are
you responsible for everything you do, but in some sense you're
responsible for everything that everyone else does too, and you
know, obviously there's a way in which that isn't true.
You know, it's delusional in some sense, but there's another way in
which it actually is true, you know, and so.
Well, I wrote a book called Extreme Ownership, and it's very
interesting. So all this is a whole, um, fought here. So, you know,
when I read the book about face, which is not about leadership.
It's not a leadership book. It's a book about a guy that was in
the leadership position, but he doesn't say, here's how you lead.
Here's what you do here. It's a book about his experience and what I
took away from it, especially because I was in leadership positions
in the military and combat situations that I started seeing all
these leadership things that he did, and there's all this
crossover because, for instance, and so for me, the crossover
was, well, I started learning about tactics when I was a young kid
because I was in the military as in the SEAL teams, and you had to
learn about how to fire maneuver. Like, that's what you do.
And then so you start learning about leadership, and then I started
training a lot of jiu-jitsu, and so those things kind of all
fit together. And it's very strange how those things started
to weave together in my head that, oh, if on the battlefield,
if you want to attack the enemy, you don't do it head on.
You flank them. You distract them and then you flank them.
You come in from the outside. In jiu-jitsu, if you want to
submit your opponent, you don't just grab their arm. No, you
start to choke them. And while they're defending the
choke, then you get their arm. And as a leader, if you want somebody
to do something, you just don't bark that order at them.
You flank them and you let them understand why it's happening.
And when I started this podcast that I do, I would start it
off by saying, in the beginning, I'd say, that's a podcast about
leadership viewed through the lens of war and atrocity.
And the more I did it, it didn't take me very long.
Where I was saying, well, it's actually a podcast about human nature.
Really is what it's actually about because the better you
understand human beings, the better you'll be able to do as a
leader because you'll understand what's happening with those
dynamics, which I guess is now leading me into some sort of
psychology. You're just kind of where you ended up with of of you
read this book. And you said you were studying political
science when you read this book. And then you said, oh, you
looked at the psychology of it. And an example that you just
brought up. And this is just what you learn when you read
and when you understand history and when you understand the way people
think, Stalin surrounded himself with people that would say yes to
him. And anybody that didn't say yes to him, he killed them.
And I'll say this again. I'll talk to military.
I also killed you if you said yes.
Yeah, the military for sure, but also any business
leader, we talked to business leaders all the time.
And you don't want people. You don't want your
subordinates or your superiors. When you tell them what to do,
just nod their head and say yes, you don't want that.
Now, the immediate thought, especially for a military guy,
they think there's nothing would make my job easier.
Then if I bark in order you Jordan, you work from your
private and on a captain and I bark in order you just
shut up and go do it. That seems like the best thing in the
world. It's absolutely not true. Because there's things
that you know on the front lines that I don't know.
And if I really want to be a good leader, I want you to
push back on me and say, hey, boss, we don't want to do that.
Here's what's going on. Let me tell you the situation.
And instead of me, you want to be able to do that.
You want to be able to teach your subordinates to do that without
being in subordinate, right? Because then it's not a
power play. It's that your interests are aligned.
Our interests are aligned. And I actually, when I talk to the
subordinates because I talk to subordinates too.
Yeah. And I say, listen, when you say something to your boss,
you don't say why the hell are we doing that, boss?
Yes. You actually have to be very tacky.
Yeah, exactly. Hey, hey, boss.
I want to make sure I'm executing this exactly how you want to
can you explain to me why we're doing this?
So I can really, really make it happen out there in the field.
Yeah. And that's a key thing.
So these ideas of psychology, I guess, now is I hate to use that
word, but because I've just called a human nature, but these ideas
they all kind of come together. And so now you're talking about
ownership, right? Extreme ownership. And this idea that,
hey, I'm responsible for everything. And so here's what I get from
a leader. They'll say, well, whether it's a business leader or
it's very easy to use a military leader. So I'll get a
platoon commander. My machine gunner shot in the wrong direction.
How can that be my fault? Because my machine gunner shot in the wrong
direction. I'm not holding his weapon. I'm not pulling his
trigger. How can that possibly be my fault? That's not my fault.
Wrong.
Who's in charge of that machine gunner? Who's in charge of making sure he
understands what it's field of his own fire? Who's in charge of making sure he
understands when and where he's allowed to shoot you are. You're the boss.
This is absolutely your fault. How did another interesting example of
the weather? The weather's bad. We couldn't execute our mission.
That's why we failed because we couldn't launch our helicopter.
Yeah, it's not my fault. Yeah. That's a hard one to argue against.
Yeah. Except for the fact that if you're a good leader, you'll say,
hey, here's our plan. We're going to use these helicopters.
And here's our contingency plan. If there's bad weather. If you don't take that
ownership of what's going on, if you don't take responsibility for it,
you're not going to change it. You're not going to fix it. And that
means you're never going to get any better. You're not going to win.
Right. But the minute you as in this and obviously this applies to
people to purple. And you know, you tell people to take responsibility.
I've, you know, tell them to take ownership of what's going on in your
world. It's the same thing. But at the end of the day.
Well, it's also, it's also seems to me to be the case. And I think that this
is part of the ethic that's embedded in in it's deeply embedded in
Christianity with the idea that the idea that the ultimate sacrifice that
you can offer to the world is the sacrifice of yourself. So like,
well, imagine that you have to sacrifice something to set the world
right while you do obviously because you have to give up things now
in order to make things better in the future. So the sacrificial idea is a
little bit more important than the question might be, well, well, if you're going to
sacrifice something, is it going to be someone else or is it going to be you?
And I really think that's the fundamental question. And the right answer to that is
that it's going to be you. It's your fault. Right. You take that on or at
least you take on that responsibility. And it is, it's a weird thing.
Weirdly difficult. It distinguish fault and responsibility. I think
responsibility is the better way of thinking about it. But it's tied in with
fault. If it doesn't go right, if it isn't going right, it's because you're not
good enough. Now, that can be crushing. There is a problem with that.
Like, and you see sometimes people who develop like psychotic depression.
And they suffer from a delusional condition in some sense that the entire
moral catastrophe of the world is literally their fault. And that's not,
there's an element of that that's that's not productive. Although there's a
lot of things that are really not good. And it's hard to find the balance so that
you can take on that responsibility without it is simultaneously being
a crushing weight because there's a lot of things in the world that are really
not good. And if they're your fault, well, that's rather hard on you.
I mean, one of the things that the Catholic Church does to help people with
that is that it gives them the opportunity to sort of wash their
sins off themselves. Right. You can go to church and you can say, well, look,
here's a bunch of ways that I've been being not who I could be. And the
church authorities say, well, you know, that's not good. And you should
straighten up and all of that and fly right. But human beings are
fallible and you're fallible. And we can't just crush you because of
your insufficiency. So we'll wash the slate clean and you can go out there
and try again. And it's very hard to get the balance between those things
right so that you can take the responsibility on without being crushed by it.
But but it's still the case that it seems to me that it's either your
fault or it's someone else's. And as soon as it's someone else's, then
you better be careful because that idea that it's someone else's is
definitely going to appeal to the worst in you. That's definitely going to
happen. And if you don't see that, then your naive or willfully blind
and all that is going to do all that's all that that is going to do is
make the situation worse. Yeah, especially because if it's not my fault and
it's your fault and I can't control you. What do I do about it? I sit there
and just suffer the consequences of the situation as opposed to, okay,
here's what's going on. I'm going to take responsibility on our ship
for them to change it. Make it happen. You talked about
turning a blind eye. And earlier you talked about turning a blind eye
to the truth to a situation. And I know there's a point in this book
where he talks about the, he's got a buddy that says, the amnesty is
coming. Right. Amnesty is coming. Let's just keep our mouth shut.
Let's do what we're told to do and we'll get, you know, we'll get out
and we'll get out. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, a social distance
says, he said, okay, yeah. And then he says to himself, wait a minute.
If I'm not, if I'm not living in order to live, then is it worth it?
Mm-hmm. And this is a question that I get asked a lot
because people get themselves into situations where they've lost
some kind of control, whether it's there in a crappy job or they've got a
bad boss or whatever, maybe they're in a bad relationship,
maybe their families met, but they're in a situation. And they,
and they don't know what to do. And part of them, I think,
anticipate the answer from me to be listened. Hey, listen, if you're not,
if you're not living in order to live, then that's wrong.
Mm-hmm. But what I actually tell them, universally almost,
and there's a couple situations where it goes outside this,
but what I tell them is what you need to do right now is you need to
play the game. You need to play the game to get the situation
to a point where you can act, right? So if you're, you got a bad boss,
right? Oh, okay, you got a bad boss. I want to tell this guy to go
to go screw himself. Yeah. Yeah. Hey, hey, guess what I'm going to do?
When my boss tells me something to do that doesn't make much sense,
you know what I'm going to do? I'm going to do it. And I'm going to do it
well. And what am I doing? I'm building that relationship with him.
He's starting to trust me. And these are going to tell me,
to do something else. Now, these things are massive,
catastrophes. It's like he's telling me to do something,
maybe there's a better way to do it. You don't need to do it that way.
Mm-hmm. And I'm going to play that game. And I'm going to build up that
relationship. Now, when eventually he tells me to do something that is
totally stupid or it's going to cost lives or money,
then when I say, hey, boss, that's not a great way to do it.
I think I know a better way could we try something else? He actually will
listen to me. So I'm going to play the game a little bit.
And I'll tell you, my gut instinct. If now, I guess it's easy to look
from the outside and say, hey, if I was in this prison camp,
my gut instinct is like, okay, jok, or you know, you've been through these
kind of things before, play the game. You're going to play the game.
Which is horrifying. Because part of playing that game to the
fullest extent here or in an Aussie prison camp would be coming a
couple. Oh, you're playing the game. Yeah. You're playing the game. Yeah.
So, and that's really the outline that the things that I said that are
outline, I always make the caveat that if you're getting asked to do
something that's e-moral, illegal, or unethical, then you actually have a
duty to say, no, I'm not going to do that. No, that's the line,
which you know, which you reach that line in the sand with Bill C.
16, which is, hey, I'm not going to do this. But the idea that
sometimes you got to play the game. And sometimes even from you, when you
just said to me, you know, sometimes you, it's not right to turn a blind
eye on things. And it's like, sometimes you have to. If you want to
get yourself to a position, like, my, my, my, my, my, it seems to me that
you're making a distinction between discipline and strategy, like,
you know, and, and, and, and, and, like, impulsive moral responding, you know,
like, let's say that you are in a situation where you have a boss who's
intolerable, and maybe what you'd like to do, you know, the resentment
has built up over five years, and you'd like to go in there and, and
yell at him and tell him everything you think. And you think, well, that's
the truth. It's like, well, it's actually, it's not a very
sophisticated truth, because you're doing a shallow and impulsive
analysis of the situation. Like, it would have been the case
that you've already compromised yourself in 500 ways, and I'll get back
to the playing the game issue, because you do have to discipline yourself
too, and, and you have to discipline yourself to, to some degree by
allowing yourself to do arbitrary things that are part of the
system, right? That's a necessary part of discipline. And
discriminating that from compliance with unethical activity is very
difficult. So that's a hard situation. But let's say,
you're going to counsel someone who has an intolerable boss, and they
come in and they're right at the end of their tether, because maybe
that's why they come for counseling. They say, I really want to
tell that son of a bitch, what I think of it, and you think, well,
wait a second here. Okay. First of all, you've already
eradicated from the list of reasonable possibilities that
decision by failing to say small things that you could have
said all the way along. And it's not like you can just all
of a sudden, blurred all of that out now, and that wipes the
slate clean in that constitutes truth. It's too unsophisticated.
So let's think, okay. So what is it that you want? Well, I don't
want this job anymore. It's like, okay. Now, let's actually have a
strategy about this then. You don't want this job anymore. Can you
get another job? Well, I don't think so. Well, so you can't
just quit. Well, no, I can't because then I don't have any money
and my family depends on the job. It's like, okay. So you can't
just stop this. That's not a viable solution. You go out of the
frying pan into the fire, or you know, you suck, you substitute
one set of unethical actions for another set of unethical
actions that are even worse. That's not helpful. All right. So
let's start thinking about what exactly it is that you want.
It's like, well, maybe I want a better job. I want to work for
someone who's more reasonable. Okay. So what's stopping you?
Well, I don't have my CV in order. My resume isn't up to
date. Well, why is that? Well, I haven't done it for five years and
I don't like doing it. Well, why is that? Well, because I'm kind of
embarrassed about it because it has holes in it. And it shows where
I'm lack of a day's at call and where I'm not prepared. It's like,
okay, how many things are there like that? Well, there's a bunch of
things. And they're all associated with how I procrastinated in the
past. It's like, okay, what are we going to do to rectify that?
So I'll say to people, why don't you update your CV? That's what
we'll do first. Because if you're going to look for a different
job, I'm not saying you're going to look for a different job. But if
you're going to look for a different job, you're not going to
unless your CV is updated. So why don't you go? Unless you can get a
good recommendation from this boss that's a tyrant. And so that's right.
There's you got to play the game. There's ten strategic
actions that you're going to have to take in order to make
yourself able to move laterally or up. And the truth is
isn't going in and yelling at your boss and telling him everything
you think about it. The truth is trying to figure out
the very, very difficult process of how you put yourself in a better
position. And that, like one of the things that's quite
fun about this lecture tour is the letters that I receive or the
stories that people tell me about switching jobs. Because they
do realize that they're, and I often talk to people about
consulting their resentment. Resentments are really useful
emotion. Like it's really dangerous. It's one of the most
dangerous psychological states I believe, but it's unbelievably
useful because resentment usually only means one of two things.
It either means quit whining and take it on because you're
immature or it means you're allowing yourself to be taken
advantage of and you have something to say or do. And so you
want to sort out the first part and find out if you're just being
immature and you can think that through and you can talk to people.
But if it's the second, it's like no, you've compromised
yourself in a variety of ways and you have to figure out how to
get out of that. And if you're resentful, that's evidence that
you have in fact done that. Okay, so now that issue would be,
well, how can you set your life up so that you can be without that
resentment? And so that's when you start to develop a
strategy for, you know, and there's actually an adventure
in this too. I mean, I've had a number of clients who have been
in jobs that they didn't like at all. And you know, they were
tyrannized by someone, for example, and they were also working
below their hypothetical level and we'd put together a plan.
It's like, okay, you're going to make three times as much money in five
years. That's the plan. But like, that's not going to be simple.
So there's education. You got to educate yourself. Maybe
formally, because you've got holes. You got to fix up your
resume. You've got to, you've got to overcome your fear of being
interviewed. You have to start sending out like 50
resumes a week on a regular basis and be prepared for a 99
percent rejection rate. You, you're going to look for a different
job. It's probably going to take six months to a year and almost all
of that is going to be rejection. You've got to steal yourself from
for that and prepare. And maybe this is going to be a three year
process. It's no trivial thing. But, you know, it's almost
inevitably, I can't remember a single example where the consequence
of that very careful, detailed, strategic thinking wasn't
massively substantive improvement in socioeconomic
positioning and a great movement towards improving trajectory.
And there's advantages even along the way, because even before that
happens, the fact that you're taking genuine steps to put yourself in
a better situation immediately starts to reduce your resentment
even if it isn't having positive consequences to begin with.
But you have to be realistic about it. It's like, look, it's going to
be hard to update your CV because you're embarrassed about it and you
should be. Right? So no wonder you're embarrassed about it. And then
you're not very good at it. And there's holes in your story and you
can be made nervous easily and you're not a very good advocate for
yourself. There's a lot of improvement that needs to be done there.
And then you have to withstand the punishment of being constantly
rejected when you apply for jobs because the baseline rejection rate,
you know, for the typical job applicant is like 99%. It's like
the rejection rate for everything. Is this going to work? No. But if you do it
a hundred times, it might work once. And that's all you need. That's exactly
it. You only need that once. And so the true there isn't to yell at your
boss. The true there is to get your life together.
Yeah. Play the game. You've got to play the game sometimes to
get a strategic win to me. And that's another interesting thing here is
that when you're in a relationship with a person, you don't want to
get yourself to yourself. As I say, you don't want to surround
yourself with yes men when you're in a leadership position. You also don't
want to be your own personal yes man that just thinks you're great and
agrees with everything that you're doing and won't tell yourself the
hard truth. You know, you can't lie to yourself. Everything,
you know, you can't lie to yourself. You can't lie to yourself.
And that course why should I go to it. You know, it's like if you don't tell
yourself the truth about what your situation is, it's going to be
problematic. Just like if you don't have people on your team above
you or below you in the chain of command that tell you the truth, that's
going to be problematic as well. Which is something that's easier. So
the playing the game thing. So are you thinking about that as a
person? You know, like because because it seems to be you're making
two cases at the same time. Right. One is that you should obviously
not undertake unethical actions. But then by the same token and
you have to subordinate yourself to the realities of the situation.
And I think that that's psychologically true because you're always in
a situation where if you're in an organization, there's kind of an
arbitrary and tyrannical aspect to it because it's never working
perfectly. And then there's the positive aspect to it too. And so
whenever you're doing a job, it could be that you're called upon to do
things that, well, what would you say that are a necessary part of the
operation of the machinery? I guess that would be particularly true in
military situations. And let me give you a little just a broad
example, right? You know, my personality and my reputation is that
when I was in the military, it's like, oh, it's jockel. He's not going to
you know, if someone tells him to do something, he doesn't want to do.
He's just going to say screw you. We're not doing it. We're doing it my
way. I got the knock. But that was kind of the impression people would
get from me. If they didn't know me from the outside, they think, oh,
this guy's a knuckle dragger. He's just going to go forward. He's
going to make things happen. And he's not going to listen to anyone else.
That was the impression from the outside. The reality is, hey, you
can't do that. And be the reality is, what my actual idea, I'd have
a young lieutenant would come to me and say, hey, you know, my boss is
to tell me to do this, this, and this. And what they think I was going to
say is like, bro, you don't do that. Stand up. You don't screw
you. That doesn't make any sense. And they'd be, they'd get this
look in the rise of surprise. When I'd say, oh, your boss wants
to do that, do it. Do it well. Play the game. That's what I'm
telling them to do is play the game because these things are
meaningless. It's something, you know, something is pathetic.
It's like, oh, you got to fill out a form of certain way.
It's like, hey, shut up and play the game. Even my. So is that a
matter of picking your battles? It certainly is a matter of picking
your battles. And you, as that's part of strategy, right? Like
everything can't be the war exactly. And it's exactly what it is.
But, you know, a good example. And we wrote about it in
that economy of leadership, which is, you know, my friend, my
friend. So, guys, it works for me. Lave, Babin. We were getting told to do all this
paperwork. You got to, you got fill out these forms. You got to, you got to
have a serialized inventory of everything. It's got to be signed
off this many days. We need to know the qualifications of each and
every person. And when their qualifications come up, do and all
these just ridiculous paperwork. And Lave came to me. And with
the other cartoon commander, guy named Seth, they came to me and
said, oh, man, this is bullshit. Why do we got to do all this
paperwork? We're, we're here training for war. We're getting ready
for war. Why we got to do this. And, you know, Lave will tell you,
his expectation was that I was going to be like, you're right. I'm going
to go to the commanding officer and tell him, screw this. We're not doing this
stuff. This is crap. We're trying to prepare because we're in training
getting ready to deploy to Iraq. This is crap. We're not doing this.
And I looked at him and said, oh, we're doing all this paperwork.
And not only are we going to do this paperwork, we're going to do it
better than anyone else. And we're going to turn it in before it's
even do. And you know, both him and Seth were kind of taking a
back then the fact that I wasn't standing up and saying, we're not doing
this. And then I explained to him, here's what we're doing. We're
building a relationship with my commanding officer with our
commanding officer. We're going to do these little things for him.
We're going to play the game because at some point two things
are going to happen. Number one, we want to build trust with my
boss. I want my boss to look at me. And when he tells me to do
fill out paperwork, he knows it's going to be filled out. If he
wants me to take down a building, he knows it's going to get
taken out. If he wants me to execute up a large mission, I'll go
and get it done. Where Bill, if I can't fill out paperwork
correctly, how can he trust me to go on a real operation and have
guys lives at risk? So the idea is like, hey, we're going to
play the game. And I think sometimes people start to hear me.
They start to listen to me. And their first instinct is
juggle wouldn't put up with this shit. And that's why
these, you know, they'll hit me up the same thing. They'll
write me an email, they'll write me a letter. And say, here's
the situation I'm in. Whether it's a boss, whether it's a
military, it's any of them. Whether it's their wife, like, like,
my wife expects me not to train you into it. Something is stupid
is that, like, my wife won't let me train. It's driving me crazy.
It's really starting to bother me. Why won't she? Well, what's
the problem? Hey, have you taken her out for dinner? Do you
know what I mean? Like play the damn game a little bit so that
you can win strategic. And the same thing I think with your
with the 12 rules, we're like, hey, tell the truth or at least
don't lie. It's like, I get it. But there's a dichotomy in
that statement. And that is if you run around telling the
absolute truth to everyone, it's going to be like that Jim
carry movie where he can't say anything that's not 100% true.
And he, you know, Gratwoman says, good morning. And he says,
you look fat. You know, it's like, one of those, like, that's
not good. And so you got to learn to play the game. And I
guess again, go back to this book. It's like, that's a
lot of stuff called to make in these situations. How much do you
play the game? And there's an ethical line that you could
cross at some point. If I become a capo, hey, you just, you
played the game. And you went too far with it. And just like in
obliterative situation, if I, if you're my boss and I'm just
kissing your ass and doing whatever you said, my guys lose
respect for me. Yeah, my team will lose respect for me. If you
tell me to do something completely stupid. And I say, hey,
guys, that's what the boss says. We're doing it. My guys will
lose respect for me. And I won't be, I won't be able to
execute missions the way I should. If when the pushback is
proper, I say, hey, hey, boss, that doesn't make any sense.
We shouldn't do that. And I go to the guys and say, listen,
I told, I talked to him. We're going to see what he says.
But trust me, if we have to do this, we'll figure out a way to
make it work. Because if you're just the guy that's totally
on board, if you're a brown nose or, right? Your
guys will lose respect for you. 100% they will. They will
lose respect for you. If you don't play the game at all, and you
push back on everything that your boss says, you're going to,
you're not going to hit fire. Yeah, that's another ethical
situation. Like if my boss, if you're my boss and you tell me to do
something, that's, I don't believe in, or it's like a bad plan.
And I, I draw the line in the sand and say, screw you Jordan.
We're not doing it. You can fire me. You're like, okay, fine,
you fire me. You get some, yes, man to come in. He takes
my guys out on the mission and gets them all killed. He didn't
mitigate the risk properly. It's better for me, ethically, to
say, hey, look, Jordan, I don't agree with this plan. I really wish
we could do it another way. Is there any way I can flex on it? You
say, nope, you're doing it this way. It is better for me in many
situations to say, okay, I got it. I'll make good indication of
the complexity of the truth. I mean, one of the rules of thumb that
I think is worth abiding by. And I guess this is something that
makes me somewhat conservative in some ways is that he
should do what everyone else does unless there's a very good
reason not to. And I think that's the same idea that you're
putting forward, which is that if you, if you do fight back against
everything, then you're just to rebel without a cause, right? And
you discredit yourself entirely. And if you accept everything,
well, then you're not even there. And so there's some judicious
analysis of the situation that helps you understand when the
time for action is right. And most of the time, what you're
doing in life is you're doing what other people do. And that's
going along with the game. That's part of being socialized, but
there's going to be times when the right thing to do is to
break a rule and to do it very carefully. And so, and
there's a scene, I think this is a new testament scene, but
it might be in some of the apocryphal writing. I don't
remember. So Christ is walking down the road on the sabbath.
And there's a ditch by the road, and it's very hot. And
in the ditch, there's a hole. And in the hole, there's a sheep. And
so the sheep is stuck in the hole. And this got shepherd is
trying to get the sheep out of the hole. And Christ walks by and
he says, if you don't understand what you're doing, you're a
transgressor of the law and you're cursed. But if you do
understand what you're doing, then you're blessed. So it's
it's a perfect example of that, because it's like, if you're
okay, now here's your situation, you're a shepherd and you're
supposed to be taking care of that sheep, right? But it's the
Sabbath day. So you're not supposed to be working. Now, if you have
decided, you've thought this through. You think it's the Sabbath day.
This is something that everybody needs because everybody needs to
take a rest. And this is a rule I shouldn't break because
everybody needs to take a rest or things degenerate. And I
understand that, and I have a lot of respect for it. But I
think that in this situation, it's still morally appropriate
for me to break that rule in this slight way and get this
sheep out of this hole, then, well, Christ's judgment was
well, then you're exactly on the right track. But if you're doing it
carelessly and stupidly, you're breaking that rule. Then you're a
transgressor of the law and you're cursed. And I think that's
exactly at the essence of what you're describing. It's like, you play
by the rules. But then there's a meta rule, which is now and then
you break the rules. And you do that very, very carefully because
when you break the rules, you're breaking the rules. And the rules
are what keep peace. They're what keep peace in order. And so you
break them only in the service of a higher peace in order. And so
that seems to be, and I think that's, you see this in, in, well,
the sorts of stories that are influencing even the things that you're
writing, like in the Harry Potter series, for example, Harry's
friends and compatriots are quite disciplined, hermione in
particular because she's an absolute master of her craft. But they
still break rules when it's necessary, only when it's necessary. And
that's what makes them more than the people who are just
breaking rules all the time, the villains, so to speak. And
also makes them more than the people that are just being good
by being conformist. So you need that touch of rebelliousness,
but it's got to be a flavoring and not the whole diet.
I've actually talked about that on this podcast before. There's
people in the military that they are like,
metal rule followers. These are people that have been following
rules of whole lives. And they've got perfect grades and they have
the team. They're all these things. And they're going to
make really good solid leaders, like they're going to be
great leaders. But then there's this like one group above them.
Yeah, have that same thing, but they also have that little
bit of rebellion that they'll say, you know what, we're not
going to win that. It doesn't make any sense. And that is
really an important factor to have. But you know,
that's one of the reasons I like this guy, Colonel David Hacker,
this guy was the ultimate rule follower for his whole
career. At the end, in Vietnam, he did interview and said,
if we keep fighting this way, we're not going to win this
war. And they drove him out of the army. But that's the thing
that because all along the way, there was other times where he
do that. You know, his guy's going to get in take care of
the guy. He'd break a rule and bring him beer or he'd do, you know,
he'd do that along the way, not not so far outside the
bonds that it would jeopardize his career. Because if he would do
that, then you're not in charge of these guys anymore. Now,
you're not going to have any impact. And so let's not get fired.
Right. Right. Let's not get stupidly fired. Right. That's not
an improvement. Exactly. Well, that's a,
awesome. I guess we, I know you got to go. So I can't
think that we could get to a better little crust of the,
our little capstone of the conversation than right there.
Thanks for coming on again. Hey, my pleasure, man.
I'm glad we got a chance to talk about this book. This is a book
that everybody should read. And, and you, I ordered the,
well, I ordered a copy of yours with a Ford from Europe.
You can't buy it from Amazon here. You can't buy it from Amazon.
So it will be here when will it be? But I don't know.
We're still negotiating the rights because the rights
of the owners differ in North America. So that's the issue at the moment.
So okay. So I worked with an English publisher,
Penguin in the UK that, that put out the,
I think it's vantage books. If I remember correctly,
I should just check and make sure that that's exactly right.
Harper perennial modern classics.
That's not, that's not the British one.
Well, that's, so that's not the British one.
The British one hasn't gotten to my house.
Yeah. And so yeah, it has to be ordered.
It has to be ordered through Amazon UK. And we're,
we're working on a couple of things. Maybe to also maybe get the audio rights
to the British version because I'd like to read it.
Nice. And that would be good. So the people could listen to it.
And so because it's, it's an absolutely necessary book.
Yeah. And it's written actually, what's,
I like it because it's written very conversation.
I mean, he's cracking jokes in there.
He's making, it's a brilliant piece of literature as well as,
I mean, it's a very readable book, although it's unbelievably harsh
and, and demanding and, and draining to read,
but it's, it's brilliantly written. It's an unbelievably
ingrossing read in the most horrible possible way.
But, and, and it is, is the case that it's written at this white
hot pace. You know, it's like talking to someone who's
righteously, not self-righteously angry, but righteously angry
for, for, for, for dozens of hours.
And he just can't believe the levels of outrage that are,
that are being, that are being so incredibly well expressed
and so effectively expressed. And, and, and again, I, I think it's also
worth emphasizing the fact that, you know,
social distance real contribution in many ways was to lay the
catastrophe at the feet of the doctrine and not to say no.
This, this wasn't an aberration because of Stellanar,
you know, Lenin being the great leader and then Stellan being the monster
because Lenin was plenty monster himself.
And Stellan was the logical conclusion to Lenin not, not an aberration.
But to say that, know, the horrors of what happened in the Soviet Union
were, were implicit in the collectivist system,
utopian system that gave rise to the philosophy to begin with,
and that that's also an explanation why the same catastrophe
is occurred wherever the Soviet system was applied everywhere else
in the world. And something we really need to know.
I mean, we fought a whole Cold War over that.
We put damn near put the world to the torch because of this.
And the idea that these ideas are, the fact that these ideas are
creeping back is really, it's unbearable as far as I'm concerned.
So hopefully people read in this book and the, the re-release of this book
with your forward will prevent that from happening.
Well, at least it hopefully it will be a, a drop in a bucket that many other
people can put drops into as well.
And so I'm hoping, I mean, I think the book has sold 15,000 copies
since the beginning of November, which is pretty good for the re-issue and old classic.
But like it, it, it, it's required reading for an informed citizen of the 21st century.
It's not optional. You need to know this material.
You're not, you're not, you don't understand your position in society
as an individual or a citizen without knowing this material.
So it's like not knowing about what happened and not see Germany.
It's not acceptable to not know.
So read the book.
Thanks for coming, Jordan.
Really good to see you again, man.
Absolutely.
Yeah, be better.
Appreciate it.
And with that Jordan Peterson has departed the recording studio.
And if you noticed that echo Charles was not present during the recording with Jordan Peterson,
but for the miracle of technology and recording echo has now joined us for the support.
You're a portion of this podcast.
So good evening echo.
Good evening.
All right.
So if people listen to this podcast, which we appreciate and you want to support this podcast and support yourself,
there are ways to do that echo can fill you in.
Sure.
So first way is wine.
You're doing you just because we're all doing you just to yes, it might sound a little bit repetitive,
but to me, when you do just going to be doing it every single day, everything a week,
at least even if you're doing the two times a week,
three times I get it, either way you're going to need a ghee and a rash cart.
So there is no question which kind of ghee you get.
You get an origin ghee straight up made in America.
I watched one of their videos yesterday and it's kind of an older one too,
but it made me like love origin even more because it's like you'll see you know the people that make up and all the ladies there and then pee like he has like longer hair and stuff like that.
It's like oh man, this kind of more of the beginnings of origin, you know, anyway, I thought it was good.
The last again made in America quality stuff for jujitsu.
It's not like a blank ghee they get from over wherever some other place and then slap a embroidered patch on it.
Let's say that.
No, this is made for jujitsu in America.
Yeah, everything made in America from where we grow the material is grown in America,
woven in America, woven in Maine as a matter of fact, custom woven by origin.
We weave it up there and make the best guise in the world.
Also got some other stuff for you know, you got t-shirts, you can get sweatshirts and also coming in 2019.
Jeans.
Yeah, jeans.
Denham origin denim.
I just call them jeans though.
Yeah, yeah, I dig it.
That starts to like, I don't know, move towards a fashion thing.
What if you take denim denim denim?
Well, I feel yeah, I dig it.
I don't feel that material.
Yeah, I feel like it's like origin denim they make it, you know.
Yeah, and then yeah, they make origin jeans for sure, but what if they make like a jean jacket?
Like a denim jacket?
No, I bet you're, but it's still be a jean jacket.
That's true.
I dig it.
Cool.
Either way, yeah, that's to, and I don't get excited for Jeans in general in life.
Oh, don't.
Yeah, like, you know, you see it on TV.
I don't know.
JCPenny has a sale.
You know, black thread or whatever.
And you know, some jeans, I don't get excited.
You probably, I'm assuming you don't either, maybe you do, I don't know, but when Pete posts
little like videos of the close, you know, close up of the buttons, the jeans.
Come on, Brown.
That's, that's kind of exciting.
I'm just saying either way.
Yeah.
Either way, the, also we have supplements too.
Affirmative.
Origin labs, which is expanding.
Yes.
Yeah, yeah, we bought another building up there.
Yeah.
But yeah, so they're making, we are making supplements.
Joint warfare, cruel oil, super cruel oil.
By the way, discipline.
The try.
Fecta.
Yeah.
My wife went on a trip.
Didn't take joint warfare with her.
Yeah.
She's there for three, four days.
Her knee starts bothering her.
It bothers her the rest of the trip.
She comes home.
She goes back on joint warfare for three, four days.
Knees fine again.
Yeah.
Same thing.
That's just, that's just crazy.
That's just a reality of it.
So joint warfare, good for your joints, cruel oil.
Also, good for your joints and good for your, good for your whole life system.
Is that a thing?
Life system?
Life.
Yes.
Okay.
Well, it's good for that too.
Discipline.
When you need that focus and also discipline go, which is my pre cognitive enhancement tool.
Go to.
Yeah.
It's funny.
True.
By the way, in Hawaii, which is the reason why I didn't appear on this episode of the podcast.
In Hawaii, so my father-in-law came.
I told him the story about how he always talk about cruel oil.
He's just sort of looking at me like whatever.
And, you know, he used to tell me, oh yeah, cruel oil is good.
Good for you all this stuff.
And he said, not listen because, you know, he's more like a health dude.
Yeah.
And then when you started talking about it, like literally the day,
you start talking about it, start taking it.
And he was like, he didn't care.
It kind of went right over his head and he was like, oh, so did you feel the difference?
You know, like that's what he was concerned about.
What do you mean care?
That sounds like a respect.
Also on top of that is Yam Mok, which is, which is Mok basically.
That's what it is.
It's, uh, it has protein in it.
You mix it with milk.
I got to make that statement.
If you mix it with oil, you can mix it with almond milk.
You can mix it with coconut milk.
You can mix it with regular cow milk.
Sure.
If you mix it with water, it's not, I'm not jumping up and down about it.
Yeah.
And tell me, it's the most delicious thing in the world.
If you mix it with milk, whole milk, especially, I will tell you, it's, it's a, it's a dessert.
Straight up.
It's a dessert that you will make you stronger.
If so, you know, like hot cocoa, you ever make hot.
Oh yeah.
Okay.
So I'm a fan.
Put in water, right?
Would you put in water and milk?
That is not hot cocoa to me.
Okay.
I know we're talking about, you get the little, the little packet that you're supposed to mix with
water.
It's got the little crappy marshmallows in it.
Yeah, that's not, that's a non-starter for me.
Yeah.
So that's kind of the point there.
It's sort of, you know, along the same lines.
Yeah.
It's cool.
It's good.
You can do it.
Yep.
And there's probably many, many, many people who do that.
You know, that's my opinion.
And by the way, you can't have hot chocolate milk.
Yeah.
It's good.
It's right up there.
Especially the word, kid one.
Yeah.
So you got Mint chocolate, peanut butter chocolate, vanilla gorilla, and the darkness.
And then there's the, the warrior kid milk, which has a little bit less protein in it.
Unless you double up on your scoops.
Like I do for the strawberry because the strawberry is ridiculously good.
So give that a shot and by the way, all these things are available at originmain.com.
And that's, that's the state of Maine.
Yeah.
Not just Maine.
Like the Maine spot.
You know, it is a Maine spot, but check.
Cool.
Yeah.
Also, if you want to represent, you know, get a discipline equals freedom, shirt, or a rash guard, you know, get after it.
Anyway, you want to represent the pat.
Go to joccostore.com.
That's where you can get all this stuff.
Hoodies.
You know, hey, Christmas is coming up.
It's facing.
There's no avoiding it.
It's coming up.
You know, so you want to grab something.
That's a good place to grab something.
Some new stuff on there too.
But yeah, if you want to represent while on the pat, joccostore.com.
Good spot.
Also, joccoweight.
So these claims of dead lifting 8,000 pounds.
I haven't dead lifted in a while.
So it was like, you know what, I'm going to test it.
It can's right.
Tied, drink it straight up dead.
Dead lifted 8,000 pounds.
Just like that.
No warm up even.
No, you don't need it.
You know, it's real.
The warm up is drinking some joccoweight.
Yeah.
That is the warm up.
And you're good.
8,000 pound deadlift.
Yeah, that's the only product in the world.
In any capacity that guarantees 100% 8,000 pound deadlift minimum.
Yeah.
100%.
But yeah, so yeah, you get them one in the dry tea bags.
If that's your thing, when you see.
See.
That's the word right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Steep.
Okay.
Boom.
If you like that gig.
Hot, cold, whatever.
And then the cans, which I recommend.
I recommend the cans.
Actually, I don't know if I'd recommend it, but I prefer the cans.
I like them both.
Yeah.
Depending on the scenario.
There you go.
Also, subscribe to the podcast on iTunes and Stitcher and Google Play, where we listen
podcasts.
There's a lot of new ones out there.
There's apps.
Yeah, for like this one.
There's a lot of podcasts out there.
Yeah.
And listen to a bunch of them.
And one of them that you can also listen to.
In addition to this one, if you want, you can check out the Warrior Kid podcast.
That's basically directed at kids.
But I'll tell you that Uncle Jake has lessons for everyone in the podcast.
And also, we got the YouTube channel.
The YouTube channel where you can watch this podcast in its full length.
And you can see what people look like if you don't know what Jordan B. Peterson looks like.
If you don't know what echo Charles looks like or if you don't know what I look like,
you can watch the YouTube channel.
And you can see all of us.
If you've never seen Echo before, but you've only heard him, he probably doesn't look like what you think he looks like.
Yeah.
And I don't know if that's good or bad.
I don't know if that's a backhanded compliment or a backhanded.
Like the Roger to where he's statement about you, about your voice.
Probably both, yeah.
A little bit of both.
Yeah.
But we'll suffice it to say that he's not what you expect when you see him in reality.
And he also makes videos that are enhanced by imagery and music.
Yeah.
Exactly.
And those are on there too.
So you can check those out.
You can subscribe to that YouTube channel.
Also, we got the psychological warfare album.
And that has tracks on it of.
Well, there are of me telling you pragmatically why you should or should not do something like skip or work out.
You should not skip or work out.
Eat donuts.
You should not eat donuts.
So just some little things like that.
You can check that out psychological warfare.
Echo claims that it has 100% effectiveness.
Yeah.
100%.
Should you go to the gym?
Yes, you should.
And if you listen to the track, you will go to the gym.
Yeah.
100% effectiveness.
And actually, I mean, a lot of claims being made about effectiveness on this scenario.
Well, man, hey, if it's real, it's real.
You know, this double blind placebo tested.
Well, you know, single blind maybe.
Okay.
I don't know what that means.
But it's a sound official.
And it is official when, okay, and I kind of act right to psychologically analyze psychological warfare.
Like why does it work every single time?
And here's part of it.
Even you, you know how like when you get hypnotized,
I'm not saying you're, we should have, I should have asked, I should have asked you
order this question.
Yeah.
And to agree with this, I think.
Okay.
Well, maybe next time we're going to ask.
Echo's bro theory on this.
So, you know, like, um, being hypnotized, for example.
Yeah.
You've never been hypnotized.
Yeah, I mean, either.
So, but then again, it looks real when something happens to someone.
You've never said, volunteered to not be hypnotized.
Okay, me neither.
Same thing.
So hypnotism from what I understand is you have to like be, what he call
a hypnotist.
So, just open to it.
Yeah.
Open to it.
So if you're a, um,
suggestible person, that's like you have a certain kind of mind.
And then on top of that, even more consciously, you have to
volunteer to be hypnotized.
Okay.
I mean, I'm sure there's methods that you can sort of hypnotize someone
without them knowing anything.
But usually, I should even say I'm sure.
But.
Oh, yeah.
It's like I'm the word for it.
I wouldn't be surprised if you can hypnotize someone and then
or not.
Nonetheless, usually the hypnotic sequence goes through, hey, you volunteer.
Like conscious, yeah, sure, I'll be hypnotizing you sit there and you're
come to ten and you're closing your eyes and breathing.
Anyway, so you consciously volunteer to be hypnotized.
So you're open to being hypnotized and then blah, blah, blah.
So psychological warfare is like, hey, you recognize, okay, I have this
weakness.
I'm about to skip this workout right now.
You're basically saying, hey, I need to help.
I need, you know, I need a little spot.
You're volunteering for help.
I'm volunteering.
Yeah, it's not like I'm like sitting in my room.
It's not completely against your will.
Exactly right.
You're not just bustin' in the door, you know, insane.
Hey, don't skip the workout.
Meanwhile, in your mind, you already committed to skipping the
way.
It's different.
You're like, you're not committed to skipping the workout.
You just like are running the risk of skipping the work.
You know, that weakness just creeps in and you're like, hey, I see you
weakness.
You're creeping in right now.
I'm going to get, I'm basically, I'm going to tell Jockel that you're in here.
And he's going to, you know, make you leave.
And you play the track or whatever you have it on your phone, right?
Because you have all your playlists on your phone.
Anyway, you just play this psychological work for everyone.
And you won't skip the workout, seem to say, because you don't want to skip the
workout.
No one wants to skip the workout.
No one's thinking tomorrow.
I can't wait to skip this workout.
No, it's not like that, you know.
So it's, you come in and you just give that little nudge.
That's why it works so good.
It's true.
It's absolutely true.
I like it.
And then the last psychological warfare, it's very effective.
100%.
Also, while you're working out and if you're bored with your squats, the bench, get some kettle
bells from on it in my opinion.
On it.com slash jockel.
Good stuff on there.
Jump rope, battle ropes, kettle bells, clubs.
Be careful with the clubs.
I was watching a video of a guy doing this club routine.
I was like, dang, he took a lot of coordination.
Like I'm looking at it and he had like the 40.
I think like I did.
I can't even imagine trying to do anything coordinated with the 40.
Yes.
Because I only have the 20.
Yeah.
And yeah, they come off real a lot more heavy than they look.
Oh yeah, when you grab them at the end of the day, if it's 20 pounds, it's 20 pounds.
No.
There's no getting past that physically.
But when you pick it up, it's like, it's like, when you pick up your friend,
you know, or your kid freaking in the way 70 pounds.
It's like, I pick up 70 pounds with one hand.
It's no problem when it's a dumbbell.
Should I pick up your kid when there's 70 pounds with one hand?
Can't do it.
It's hard.
Unless that's how these clubs are anyway.
So watch out for those anyway.
Go to onit.com slash jockel.
You can get some really cool stuff on there.
Really cool.
Awesome.
I got some books as well.
First off, Mike in the dragons.
I know Jordan and I talked about it a little bit today.
And it was actually sold out for a little bit.
It is now back in stock and have many, many, many,
thousands and thousands of copies that are inbound that are being printed.
So if you want Mike in the dragons,
go to Amazon in order.
There's a little video on there.
If you want to know what it's about that echo put together.
It's a solid video from what I understand.
The kids like to watch the video.
It's like a little mini short.
It's super fast.
It's two minutes.
Even in even my kids.
So we're on, on, I watched the video.
Yeah.
If you are sending to me, I watched it like 14 times.
Because there's a lot of elements in it.
A lot of things going on.
Yeah.
To my son.
It's like a micro cartoon kind of.
No, it's like a micro movie.
Yeah.
Well, it's a cartoon because there's a illustration.
But yeah, it's fun.
We put on the TV when I was in Hawaii.
You know, yeah, smart TV and there you can put YouTube on there.
Oh, he's put on there.
I put on the TV and my kids are all jumping up at that mic in the dragon's mouth.
It's, you know, it's two minutes long.
Yeah.
No, I, you know, Jordan and I were talking about it.
And, you know, obviously it's about facing your dragons.
And there's obviously a metaphor there.
And it's a real true pragmatic, simple to understand lessons of how to stand up and confront the
world and confront your fears that little kids will clearly and easily understand.
And it'll even impact on anybody that reads it.
So, Mike in the dragons, you can get that book.
On top of that, if you got kids, you can also get them the way of the warrior kid, which is another book about a young kid who's going through the problems that normal kids have.
And luckily, Uncle Jake, who was a seal in the seal team, shows up for the summer and helps them overcome those problems.
And then that series carries on another book called Mark's Mission.
You can pick those two books up and give me that whatever kids you, those, those books, when you read those books,
you'll wish you had that book when you were a kid.
I know I absolutely wish I had that book when I was a kid.
And I wish I had that book when my kids were kids.
Yeah.
Because it teaches them what it is they need to know, period.
That's it.
The discipline goes for you to feel manual.
That book.
That's how you do that's how you, it's just a field manual of how to be on the path of discipline.
That's what it is.
Look, the path of discipline is not easy.
And there's no field manual for it.
Oh, wait, there is now.
But there didn't used to be.
There didn't used to be.
Look, I know discipline will help me.
How do I get discipline?
Where does discipline come from?
None of that information was assembled anywhere.
I made a field manual for it.
It's called the discipline equals freedom.
Field manual.
It's not, it's not like any other book you can do.
We other book you've ever seen or read period.
It's not.
But it's very popular.
It's great.
If you want, there's another thing.
Kris, this one is a Christmas.
This is a Christmas scenario.
Give this book to somebody that needs help or needs to stay on the path or get on the path.
This book will be extremely beneficial to them or people that are on the path.
Getting after it.
This won't keep them there.
So that's the field manual.
If you want the audio version that it is not unautable,
it's on iTunes and Amazon, Music and Google Play as an MP3.
Also, the first book I wrote with my brother,
Lave Babin, it's called Extreme Ownership,
but that is a book taking the leadership lessons
that we learned on the battlefield
and translating them to your business and to your life.
And then the follow-up to that book
is the dichotomy of leadership,
which takes those lessons that we learned in combat
and goes granular in teaching you how to balance
the various dichotomies that you experience as a leader.
So both, and all those books are available
on Amazon or wherever else you might divide books.
Also, we got Ashlan Front,
which is my leadership consultancy.
We solve problems through leadership.
That's what we do.
We work with companies all over the country
and internationally, if you want us to come
and align the leadership at your company for victory,
then go to Ashlan Front.com.
We are doing, we have a leadership conference called The Muster.
And we've done six monsters.
We are doing three in 2019.
We're doing one in Chicago in the spring.
We're doing one in Denver in the fall
and we're doing Sydney, Australia, in December.
So if you want to come to one of those events,
all the events that we've done have sold out,
all of them.
These are all absolutely going to sell out.
So if you want to come, go to extremownership.com
and register and as quick as you can.
And then lastly, we have EF Overwatch.
We are connecting special operations, veterans,
and combat aviation veterans that are looking for work,
that are proven leaders that are experienced leaders
and we're connecting them with companies out there
in the civilian sector that need leaders.
So if you want to comment that from either side,
whether you're a vet or whether you're a company,
go to EF Overwatch.com to get in the game.
And if you have any more questions for us
or answers for us, we are available on the interwebs
on Twitter and on Instagram and on the Facebook.
This book, Echoes, Adequatrals and I am at Jocca Willink
and I started out this podcast today.
Pretty heavy, pretty rough.
And I think it's important to remember something
that I always refer back to and that is that Eval does
exist in the world.
It's out there.
And with that, I'd like to thank all the military personnel
throughout the globe that stand up to Eval
in the world and thanks to police
and law enforcement and firefighters and paramedics
and EMTs and correctional officers and border patrol
and all the first responders that stand up
and face Eval here at home
and to everyone else out there.
If things are tough and I know they get tough,
life is hard, but there's still reason to be thankful.
Be thankful you're not in a good log.
Be thankful that you're not being tortured,
be thankful that you have food to eat,
be thankful you have a bed to sleep on.
And then do your best to watch out for those
little seeds of Eval that are planted around you
and planted in you and keep those seeds of Eval in check
by going out into the world and doing good.
And until next time, this is echo and jocco out.